# BABEL

Babel is a simple internationalisation tool for Lua and LÖVE 2D.

## Installation

### Copy / Pasta

Simply copy `babel.lua` in your project folder wherever you want.

Then you will call babel with:

```lua
babel = require "your/path/to/babel"
```

### Luarocks / from downloaded sources

Official repository submission is currently pending, but you can install babel
with Luarocks this way :

Get the full code of babel using the [autogenerated archive](https://github.com/martin-damien/babel/archive/master.zip) or by cloning the repository with git:

    git clone https://github.com/martin-damien/babel

Then go in the babel folder with a terminal and type:

    luarocks make

This will install babel as if it was downloaded from the official repository on
your system.

Then you will call babel with:

```lua
babel = require "babel"
```

### Luarocks / from official repository

**babel is not currently in the Luarocks repository (process is pending) so,
this will not work for now!**

In a terminal type:

    luarocks install babel

The you will call babel with:

```lua
babel = require "babel"
```

## Usage

### Standalone applications

Standalone applications can use babel the way they want. Just take a look at
the API and this short example:

```lua
-- We assume that our translations will be in a
-- "translations" folder at the root of our project.
-- (this is the default path)

babel.init({ locale = "jap-JP" })

print( _("Hello %name%", { name = "Kitty" }) )
```

### LÖVE games

Note that for LÖVE games you will need the **Copy / Pasta** installation to
make it available trough your folder or your archive.

### Initialisation

You must initialize babel in `love.load()`.

```lua
function love.load()

    babel.init({
        locale = "fre-FR",
        locales_folders = { "assets/i18n", "assets/i18n/monsters" }
    })

end
```

## API

### Initialisation

`babel.init()` can get a table as argument with the following indexes :

  * `locale` The locale to use.
  * `locales_folders` A table of the folders where babel will look for locales files.

### Translate text

There is two function to translate text : `babel.translate` and `_` (who is
a global alias to the first function).

``` lua
_( "Text to translate" )
-- or
babel.translate( "Text to translate" )
```

### Formating date and time

There is only one function for displaying date and time : `babel.dateTime`:

```lua
babel.dateTime( "long_date_time", os.date( "*t" ) )
babel.dateTime( "%H:%i:s" )
```

The first parameter could be two things:

  * An index in the `date_time` table in the `formats` table of locale files.
  * A pattern to use

The second parameter is a table following the format returned by `os.date`
([See documentation](http://www.lua.org/pil/22.1.html)). If not provided, it will
be set to the current date/time.

#### Symbols that can be used in custom patterns

  * **%H**: hour (on 24)
  * **%i**: minutes
  * **%s**: secondes
  * **%g**: hour (on 12)
  * **%a**: AM/PM
  * **%d**: day
  * **%l**: day name (long name)
  * **%F**: month name (long name)
  * **%m**: month
  * **%Y**: year (4 digits)

### Formating numbers

There is two functions to format numbers : `babel.number` for simple numbers
and `babel.price` for prices.

```lua
babel.price( 2340.90 )  --  £ 2,340.90
babel.number( -3400 )   --   -3,400.00
```

#### Using variables in translated texts

You can use variables in translations by passing extra parameters to the
translate function :

```lua
_( "Hello %name%", { name = "your name" } )
```

You can use as many entries you need in the extra `table`.

### Add locales files on the fly

If you need to load other locales files after `init()`, you can use :

``` lua
babel.addLocalesFolder( "my other/folder" )
```

### Change which locale to use

You can switch the current locale using:

```lua
babel.switchToLocale( locale )
```

## Create and manage locale files

All the translations are stored in a lua file with the name of the locale (for
ex. `eng-UK.lua` or `fre-FR.lua`. Thoses files are stored in the folder given
in `babel.init()` (or in a `translations` folder in the same folder than
`babel.lua` if none given).

### Structure of a locale file

``` lua
LANGUAGE = {

    formats = {
        date_time = {
            my_format = "%l %H:%i"
        }
    },

    -- List of all the translations
    translations = {

        -- The key of each element is the text in parameter of babel.translate()
        ['Hello world'] = "Bonjour le monde",
        ['My name is %name%'] = "Mon nom est %name%"

    }

}
return LANGUAGE
```
